--- PAGE 1 ---
Proceedings of the Ninth Conference on Machine Translation, pages 1332–1354
November 15-16, 2024 ©2024 Association for Computational Linguistics
Shortcomings of LLMs for Low-Resource Translation: Retrieval and
Understanding are Both the Problem
Sara Court
The Ohio State University
court.22@osu.edu
Micha Elsner
The Ohio State University
elsner.14@osu.edu
Abstract
This work investigates the in-context learning
abilities of pretrained large language models
(LLMs) when instructed to translate text from a
low-resource language into a high-resource lan-
guage as part of an automated machine transla-
tion pipeline. We conduct a set of experiments
translating Southern Quechua to Spanish and
examine the informativity of various types of
context retrieved from a constrained database
of digitized pedagogical materials (dictionar-
ies and grammar lessons) and parallel corpora.
Using both automatic and human evaluation
of model output, we conduct ablation studies
that manipulate (1) context type (morpheme
translations, grammar descriptions, and corpus
examples), (2) retrieval methods (automated
vs. manual), and (3) model type. Our results
suggest that even relatively small LLMs are ca-
pable of utilizing prompt context for zero-shot
low-resource translation when provided a min-
imally sufficient amount of relevant linguistic
information. However, the variable effects of
context type, retrieval method, model type, and
language-specific factors highlight the limita-
tions of using even the best LLMs as translation
systems for the majority of the world’s 7,000+
languages and their speakers.
1
Introduction
Despite great progress in the quality of today’s state
of the art machine translation (MT) systems, con-
straints on the amount and kinds of data available in
the majority of the world’s 7,000+ languages have
led to yet another disparity in access and support
for speakers of these languages: low-resource MT
continues to be a major challenge (Hendy et al.,
2023; Nicholas and Bhatia, 2023; Robinson et al.,
2023; Stap and Araabi, 2023). Although many
languages lack the kinds of large, standardized
corpora necessary for traditional MT methods, re-
cent work suggests it may be possible to leverage a
smaller amount of existing resources, for example
pedagogical materials used for language instruc-
tion, to develop MT systems with Large Language
Models (LLMs), albeit with varying results (El-
sner and Needle, 2023; Tanzer et al., 2024; Zhang
et al., 2024). These materials are often the result of
community-driven or government-led initiatives to
support language revitalization, reclamation, and
mother-tongue education (Schreiner et al., 2020;
Liu et al., 2022; Riestenberg et al., 2024). Such dis-
crepancies in the needs and priorities of academic,
commercial, and community-led efforts to develop
digital resources and language technologies is what
Gessler (2022) terms the “NLP Gap”.
In this study, we investigate one way to lessen
the NLP Gap, comparing LLMs’ in-context learn-
ing abilities when translating from a low-resource
language (a Peruvian variety of Southern Quechua)
to a high-resource language (Spanish) using infor-
mation retrieved from a database of pedagogical
materials. We replicate results of earlier studies on
a new language pair by comparing the effects of
morpheme translations, sentences from a parallel
corpus, and passages from a grammar instruction
document on translation quality. We then conduct
a more focused analysis by annotating translation
outputs by hand using a modified MQM error ty-
pology (Burchardt, 2013). Finally, we conduct an
ablation study on the effects of automated retrieval
by manually constructing prompts using the same
set of materials.
Our results suggest that while, unsurprisingly,
translation quality improves with model size, such
improvements seem to primarily be the result of
previous exposure to the low-resource language
during model pretraining, rather than an improved
ability for the model to utilize prompt context, as
evidenced by high scores in response to baseline
(zero-shot) translation prompts. However, we also
find evidence that in-context learning abilities may
be inconsistent across different models of similar
size. As found in previous studies, prompts contain-
1332

--- PAGE 2 ---
ing morpheme and word-level translations reliably
improve model outputs, but information from the
grammar and corpus have a null or even negative
effect on results. Human evaluation on a selec-
tion of outputs from two models – GPT-3.5 Turbo
and GPT-4o – align with the quantitative measures
we obtain using BLEURT (Sellam et al., 2020)
as an automatic metric. Quantitative results also
show an effect of automated retrieval on translation
quality that is most evident in prompts containing
morpheme translations and for models with lower
baseline scores. Finally, we highlight a number
of ethical concerns and limitations that arise from
the proposed methods that are supported by our
findings, and discuss the potential risks and chal-
lenges LLM-based methods for low-resource MT
face moving forward.
2
LLMs for Machine Translation
Modern LLMs are now capable of translating many
high-resource languages, but lack sufficient cov-
erage of even modestly resourced languages to
achieve comparable results without additional sup-
port (Kocmi et al., 2023). Retrieval-augmented
generation (Rubin et al., 2022) may provide such
support in the form of parallel sentences (Agrawal
et al., 2022), dictionary definitions (Ghazvinine-
jad et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2023) or other linguistic
meta-knowledge such as a grammatical description.
Retrieval-augmented methods offer exciting possi-
bilities for low-resource translation, since the LLM
might (in principle) be able to “teach itself” the
language from learner-oriented resources produced
by community members or language specialists.
Studies to date (Elsner and Needle, 2023; Reid
et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) experiment with
four dimensions of variability: source language,
LLM, type(s) of information retrieved, and retrieval
method. Since the source languages in these stud-
ies have relatively little presence in public corpora
or on the web, differing results across LLMs can
tentatively be attributed to differences in their in-
context learning and instruction-following abilities.
All studies find that word-level translations are
helpful additions to prompts. Zhang et al. (2024)
and Tanzer et al. (2024) also add sentence pairs
from a parallel corpus, while Elsner and Needle
(2023) add usage examples from a dictionary. Each
improves results, although to a lesser degree. El-
sner and Needle (2023) and Zhang et al. (2024)
experiment with small fixed “grammar lesson” pas-
sages to provide explicit syntactic instruction, but
find these ineffective. Tanzer et al. (2024) uses pas-
sages retrieved from a grammar book, also with rel-
atively disappointing results. Reid et al. (2024) use
the entire grammar book and a very long-context
model to obtain better translations, but without
exploring the role explicit grammar instruction ac-
tually plays in doing so.
Zhang et al. (2024) find that sentences from the
corpus retrieved using BM25 embeddings (Robert-
son et al., 2009) work better than random ones.
Tanzer et al. (2024), however, report that retrieval
with longest common substring (LCS) matching
outperforms embedding-based retrieval. Overall,
the question of how to best retrieve relevant pas-
sages containing grammar material or sentences
in a low-resource language is still open.
This
also complicates the interpretation of the mostly-
negative results found for grammar passages. It is
not clear whether these stem from poor retrieval,
from the LLM’s inability to process the retrieved
content, or both. Moreover, although Reid et al.
(2024) conducts human evaluation of the results for
quality, to the best of our knowledge no study to
date systematically investigates specific grammati-
cal errors in the output.
Finally, each of these studies finds a significant
decrease in LLMs’ abilities to translate from a high-
resource language into a low-resource language
relative to experiments in the opposite direction.
This is in line with McCoy et al. (2023), who find
that while the accuracy of an LLM’s output highly
depends on the probability of both the input and
the output text, output probability has a greater
influence on model performance. We therefore
focus this study on a single translation direction,
instructing LLMs to output translations from a low-
resource language into the language with which
they are likely to have had more exposure during
training, i.e, from Southern Quechua into Spanish,
and leave the reverse direction for future work.
3
Quechuan Languages
Quechua is a family of languages Indigenous to the
Andes in South America. This study focuses on
varieties of Southern Quechua (S. Quechua, also
known as urin quechua or quechua sureño) spoken
in parts of Peru.1 While previous studies investi-
gated language-LLM pairs for which the baseline
1Unless noted otherwise, we use Quechua in this study to
refer Southern Quechua and related varieties.
1333

--- PAGE 3 ---
LLM lacked any pretrained knowledge, we find
that newer LLMs can translate some S. Quechua
sentences in a zero-shot setting. We expect this to
be typical of many low-resource languages which,
while often endangered, still may have some pres-
ence on the web.
Quechuan languages have by far the largest rep-
resentation of all Indigenous Latin American lan-
guages in NLP research (Tonja et al., 2024) and
are often included in ACL-affiliated workshops,
datasets, and shared tasks (Cotterell et al., 2020;
Ebrahimi et al., 2022, 2023). S. Quechua has a
robust language toolkit (Rios, 2015), including the
morphological parser we use in our pipeline. It has
also been the subject of numerous studies on MT
for both text and speech, developed in conjunction
with monolingual and parallel corpora (Rios, 2015;
Cardenas et al., 2018; Ortega et al., 2020; Zevallos
et al., 2022). Nonetheless, such tools continue to
face challenges, and Quechuan languages continue
to lack the resources necessary to develop most of
today’s state of the art models.
Since Quechua is primarily spoken in South
America, the majority of available digital resources,
including all materials used in this study, use Span-
ish as the language of translation, explanation,
and/or instruction. We therefore also use Spanish,
rather than English or any other high-resource lan-
guage, as the language of translation and prompting
when testing our system.
3.1
Language-Specific Factors
While the proposed methods are general enough to
be applied to any language pair, model outputs may
reflect certain language-specific characteristics of
the source and target languages, respectively. In
this section, we provide a brief description of se-
lected language-specific factors in S. Quechua as
they relate to their translated Spanish counterparts.
For a discussion of their potential effects on our
results, please see Section 6.1.
3.1.1
Morphological Segmentation
S. Quechua is primarily agglutinating, i.e., much of
the morphology may be described in terms of iso-
morphic form-meaning relationships, morphemes
generally maintain a consistent form regardless of
their phonological environment, and morpheme
boundaries tend to be transparent.
In contrast,
morpheme segmentation in Spanish may be ren-
dered opaque due to its fusional morphology and
widespread use of conditioned allomorphy.
While LLMs are trained to process text via token-
based rather than morpheme-based segmentation,
it is possible that a lack of direct correspondence
between the expression of morphosyntactic cate-
gories in S. Quechua and Spanish may affect a
model’s ability to leverage the information we pro-
vide as prompt context in our experiments. Cor-
respondences in form and meaning across parallel
usage examples may be particularly obscured, lim-
iting the use of corpora designed for traditional
MT methods. It may be possible to mitigate such
issues with more advanced retrieval or prompting
techniques, for example by explicitly instructing an
LLM to conduct morphological analysis as part of
the translation process, but we leave this for future
work.
3.1.2
Syncretism and Polysemy
Although the language is primarily agglutinating, a
number of morphemes in S. Quechua are syncretic,
such that a given form may be used to express more
than one grammatical category. For example, the
1SG.POSS marker, -y, shares the same form as both
the 2SG.IMP marker and the infinitival marker, as
illustrated in the following examples:
(1)
ñaña-y
sister-1SG.POSS
‘my sister’
(2)
Mikhu-y!
eat-2SG.IMP
‘Eat!’
(3)
mikhu-y-ta
eat-INF-ACC
muna-ni
want-1SG
‘I want to eat’
Similarly, words in S. Quechua may be polyse-
mous, with the potential to express more than one
meaning depending on their use in context. For
example, the S. Quechua word miski (misk’i) may
be translated as either dulce ‘sweet’ or rico/a ‘de-
licious’, and both dulce and rico/a are themselves
polysemous in Spanish. Dulce may be used as an
adjective, i.e., ‘sweet’, or a noun, i.e.,‘candy’, and
rico/a may describe either richness in flavor, i.e.,
‘delicious’, or in monetary wealth, i.e., ‘rich’.
The exact forms displaying syncretism or pol-
ysemy must be identified on a language-specific
basis, but the ambiguity they present poses a clear
problem for our proposed methods in general, with
1334

--- PAGE 4 ---
potential effects on both retrieval and generation.
We discuss this issue further in Section 6.1.
3.1.3
Variation
Both S. Quechua and Spanish are characterized
by extensive regional and dialectal variation. In S.
Quechua, this includes differences in orthographic
and/or phonological conventions as well as the spe-
cific lexical items and expression of morphosyn-
tactic content. For example, the S. Quechua word
for ‘dog’ may be rendered orthographically as alqo,
allqo, allku, allqu, or ashko, and the additive suffix
may be expressed as either -pas or -pis, depending
on the community. Variation in the attested us-
age of specific lexical items and morphemes across
communities is also common in S. Quechua. For
example, the evidential marker -mi /-m is frequently
attested in the Peruvian variety of S. Quechua used
in this study, but essentially absent in many Boli-
vian varieties.
Variation across Spanish-speaking communities
may also affect models’ abilities to produce trans-
lations that are both accurate and appropriate. The
Andean Spanish reference translations used in this
study do not appear to affect the results of our au-
tomatic evaluation. However, were the proposed
methods to be applied in a realistic setting, it would
be especially important to assess the degree of
alignment between any prescriptive linguistic stan-
dards that have been implicitly acquired by the
LLM and the usage conventions of the language
community or communities of interest.
4
Methods
4.1
Data
We conduct experiments on a collection of 50 pairs
of S. Quechua - Spanish sentences sourced from
one of the author’s personal notes. These were se-
lected to highlight a range of specific grammatical
phenomena at multiple levels of difficulty— they
include simple clauses and tenses (Example (4)),
as well as more advanced constructions such as
those involving past participles (Example (5)) and
simultaneous events (Example (6).
(4)
qam
you
allin-ta
good-ACC
tusu-nki
dance-2SG
tu bailas bien
‘you dance well’
[TAREA] Traduce la siguiente frase del quechua al
español. Responde sólo con la traducción:
quechua: kay wasiqa turiypam
español:
Figure 1: Example BASELINE prompt. English: [TASK]
Translate the following sentence from Quechua to Span-
ish. Respond only with the translation: Quechua: kay
wasiqa turiypam; Spanish:
(5)
awa-sqa-y
knit-PP-1SG
wali-qa
skirt-TOP
sumaq-mi
great-ASSERTIVE
la falda que tejí es linda
‘the skirt that I knit is pretty’
(6)
qam-qa
you-TOP
taki-ta
song-ACC
uyari-spa
listen-SUBR
wasi-yki-ta
house-2.POSS-ACC
picha-chka-nki
clean-PROG-2SG
tú estás limpiando tu casa escuchando
música
‘you’re cleaning your house listening to mu-
sic’
The first author, a foreign-language student of S.
Quechua, received permission from her instructor
to use notes from their lessons for the study. All
sentence pairs were inspected by the instructor, a
native bilingual speaker of both S. Quechua and Pe-
ruvian Spanish, to eliminate any errors and confirm
the accuracy of all reference translations.
4.2
Prompt Construction
As a baseline, each sentence is inserted into a
prompt template that instructs the model in Spanish
to translate the S. Quechua sentence into Spanish
and respond only with the translation (Figure 1).
We automate a process for building on this template
and compare the effects of adding information from
three different sources to the prompt context.
4.2.1
Morpheme Translations (MORPH)
We use a morphological parser (Rios, 2015) to
segment each word of the source segment into
morphemes, each with gloss symbols and a Span-
ish translation.2 Some morphemes have multiple
candidate meanings, all of which are retrieved.
As an example, the word rantikuq is segmented
as ranti-ku-q and glossed as “comprar.DB.VRoot-
DB.VDeriv.+RflxInt+Ag.NS.”
2We set aside valid concerns regarding the theoretical sta-
tus of the morpheme for this study and define a morph(eme)
loosely as a recognizable form-meaning pair that recurs in a
language.
1335

--- PAGE 5 ---
While numerous orthographic standards have
been developed and promoted across Quechuan-
speaking communities in South America, consider-
able variation in orthographic conventions may be
found even within a particular community or vari-
ety (Rios and Castro Mamani, 2014). We discuss
the implications of this for our results in Section
4.2.5.
We supplement the output from the parser us-
ing a Quechua-Spanish bilingual dictionary (Qh-
eswa Simi Hamut’ana Kurak Suntur, 2005). We
retrieve any dictionary entry whose headword ex-
actly matches a morpheme in our segmentation. By
default, we include all senses and any usage ex-
amples or contextual information in the dictionary
entry as part of the prompt. We then concatenate
the output of the parser with the retrieved dictio-
nary entries and include this MORPH information
as prompt context preceding the source sentence
and baseline translation prompt.
4.2.2
Grammar Descriptions (GRAMMAR)
We also experiment with the inclusion of grammar
lessons found in student-facing pedagogical mate-
rials, retrieving grammatical explanations relevant
to each source sentence from a PDF document de-
veloped for students and teachers of S. Quechua
(Pinto Tapia et al., 2005). The document is or-
ganized into short sections (1-3 sentences, plus
paradigm tables or usage examples) that describe
the particular grammatical concept associated with
an affix in Quechua. For each source sentence, we
retrieve sections associated with any affix listed in
the document that is an exact match of a morpheme
and include this in prompts using contextual infor-
mation from the grammar. This improves on the
methods described in Tanzer et al. (2024), who use
LCS-based retrieval over an entire textbook, and
Elsner and Needle 2023 and Zhang et al. 2024,
whose grammatical description remains consistent
across prompts regardless of the source text being
translated.
4.2.3
Parallel Usage Examples (CORPUS)
Finally, we experiment with sentence-level exam-
ples from a S. Quechua-Spanish parallel corpus
designed for traditional NLP tasks. We combine
data made available via the AmericasNLP 2021
Shared Task on Open Machine Translation and
the 2023 IWSLT shared task on low-resource SLT
(Tiedemann, 2012; Agi´c and Vuli´c, 2019; Ortega
et al., 2020; Mager et al., 2021; Agarwal et al.,
2023). For each source sentence, we retrieve the
three best matches from the corpus using a LCS
search against the full source sentence.
4.2.4
Combined Prompt Types
Combinations of information from all three sources
yields 8 total conditions, including the baseline. An
example prompt from each information source is
given in Appendix E.
4.2.5
Manually Revised Prompts
To compute a soft upper bound on the improve-
ments possible with better retrieval, we conduct
an additional set of experiments using manually
revised prompts. We first examine the content re-
trieved from the morphological parser, dictionary,
and grammar document and remove all instances of
ambiguity and irrelevant or misleading information
from the prompt context.3
For example, many S. Quechua speakers use
the term runasimi (lit: ‘people mouth’, ‘the peo-
ple’s language’), as an endonym for the language.
The parser, however, returns only the literal de-
composition (runa ‘ser humanos’/‘people’ and simi
‘boca’/‘mouth’), and the dictionary does not list
runasimi as a headword but rather as one of eight
different senses of simi. We thus remove all such ir-
relevant examples and translations from the prompt
and retain only the content indicating a translation
of runasimi in the linguistic sense.
We also manually retrieve content from the dic-
tionary and grammar documents that were over-
looked by the automated retriever. For example, the
verb yanuy ‘to cook’ does not appear as a headword
in the dictionary, but rather as a regional variant
of wayk’uy ‘to cook’. We also eliminate content
from the grammar that was retrieved because of
syncretism, or mistakes that cascaded from the mor-
phological parser to result in irrelevant retrievals.
We manually parse each source sentence to only
retrieve and include relevant information in the
prompt context. All content in the revised prompts
is sourced from the same material available to the
automated retriever systems, and we do not add any
additional information or use supplemental materi-
als of any sort to create the revised prompts.
3We do not experiment with retrieval methods for corpus
examples, which were retrieved using LCS match in both
conditions. Improving on LCS-based retrieval remains an
open question in low-resource LLM-MT, and we leave this for
future work.
1336

--- PAGE 6 ---
4.3
Models
We experiment with three proprietary models, GPT-
3.5 Turbo (gpt-3.5-turbo-0125, Brown et al.,
2020), GPT-4o (gpt-4o, Achiam et al., 2023),
and Gemini 1.5 Pro (gemini-1.5-pro, Reid et al.,
2024), and one open-source model, Llama 3
(llama-3-8b-instruct, AI@Meta, 2024). We
use the pretrained models with their default set-
tings, and do not adjust hyperparameters or conduct
any finetuning as part of our experiments.
4.4
Evaluation
We conduct both automatic and human evaluations
to identify trends in model errors and outputs in
the various experimental conditions. We calcu-
late BLEURT and BLEU scores as automatic met-
rics, and report mean BLEURT scores across items
as the primary quantitative measure of translation
quality for each of the conditions and models. We
also use an adapted MQM schema to conduct qual-
itative human evaluation of the outputs of GPT-3.5
and GPT-4o for all prompts using automatic re-
trieval.
Each item selected for human evaluation is an-
notated by at least one of the authors by comparing
the model’s output to the source text and reference
translation. We refer to the complete MQM typol-
ogy to design our own four-dimensional framework
of commonly attested errors in LLM-MT, each with
a defined set of specific subtypes. Precise defi-
nitions and examples for all error categories and
subtypes may be found in Appendix D.
Many of the categories in our schema are de-
fined as in the core MQM framework. However,
to capture some of the key behaviors reported in
previous studies on LLM-MT and to evaluate the
effects of prompt type on model outputs, we make
the following adjustments. First, we utilize the
Addition and Omission errors defined as Accuracy
subtypes in the original MQM typology, but distin-
guish these from three additional subtypes: Substi-
tution - Incorrect Subject, Substitution - Incorrect
Tense/Aspect/Modality (TAM), and Substitution -
Other. This is intended to capture LLM transla-
tions that differ from the source in terms of discrete
lexical material or case, person, number, and/or
TAM markings while otherwise maintaining the
lexical and structural content needed to appropri-
ately translate the source text. Although they are
not the only grammatical phenomena that may be
similarly misrendered, we select subject and TAM
markers for analysis as they are straightforward to
identify and give a good indication of how well the
LLMs cope with more abstract information about
the meanings of functional morphemes.
Rather than including Mistranslation and MT
Hallucination as Accuracy Error subtypes as in the
original MQM typology, we define a separate Non-
Translation category with three possible subtypes:
Complete Mistranslation, Mistranslation with Lex-
ical Correspondences, and Refusal. The third di-
mension of our typology, Model Error, was ulti-
mately not used to classify any output in this study,
but characterizes more generic model “misbehav-
ior” such as failing to follow instructions, produc-
ing garbled text, or inappropriately generating con-
tent in the source language. Finally, Target Errors
identify outputs that are ungrammatical, stylisti-
cally inappropriate, or semantically incoherent in
the target language, regardless of their accuracy.
Detailed annotation guidelines were drafted and
agreed upon to encourage consistency across an-
notators and experimental items. Annotators are
instructed to identify and tag up to three specific
errors for each translation output, with the excep-
tion of Target Errors, which do not count towards
the three-error maximum. Each model output is
also tagged for quality along a four-point scale as
defined in Table 5.
Before proceeding with annotation over the
larger dataset, both annotators also completed a
test evaluation of the same 12 experimental items
(96 sentences total) to assess inter-annotator agree-
ment. Statistical measures (κ = 0.72 for quality
judgments, α = 0.55 for error categories) indi-
cated some discrepancies in annotator judgments,
especially for categories, since determining the
three most important errors is especially subjective.
These were identified and discussed, and agreement
was ultimately deemed sufficient to proceed.
5
Results
5.1
Quality Metrics
We present BLEURT scores for prompts generated
using automated retrieval in Table 1 and summarize
human quality judgments for GPT-3.5 and GPT-
4o with automated retrieval in Table 2. The com-
plete distribution of BLEURT, BLEU, and human-
annotated quality ratings for all of our experiments
is provided in Appendix F. We find clear effects of
LLM, prompt type, and retrieval method, as well
as interactions among all three factors.
1337

--- PAGE 7 ---
GPT3.5
GPT4o
Gem.
Lla3
BASE
0.19
0.66
0.56
0.15
CORPUS
0.27
0.59
0.49
0.19
GRAM
0.23
0.56
0.55
0.17
MORPH
0.44
0.54
0.61
0.39
C+G
0.26
0.59
0.54
0.21
C+M
0.44
0.59
0.59
0.36
G+M
0.41
0.53
0.61
0.39
C+G+M
0.43
0.57
0.61
0.15
Table 1: Mean BLEURT scores by LLM and prompt
type. Shaded rows include morpheme contexts.
LLM
GPT-3.5
GPT-4o
BASELINE
21
108
CORPUS
43
101
GRAMMAR
33
99
MORPH
79
102
C+G
41
101
C+M
75
110
G+M
68
100
C+G+M
77
109
Table 2: Human-annotated quality ratings summarized
as 3 × high + 2 × med + low. Shaded rows include
morpheme contexts.
GPT3.5
GPT4
Gem.
Lla3
G-AUTO
0.23
0.56
0.55
0.17
G-MAN
0.24
0.58
0.54
0.15
M-AUTO
0.44
0.54
0.61
0.39
M-MAN
0.56
0.63
0.66
0.49
CGM-AUTO
0.43
0.57
0.61
0.15
CGM-MAN
0.54
0.63
0.63
0.26
Table 3: Comparison of mean BLEURT scores for auto-
matic versus manual retrieval of material in GRAMMAR,
MORPH, and CORPUS-GRAMMAR-MORPH prompts.
Comparing across models, we find that Gemini
and GPT-4o outperform Llama 3 and GPT-3.5 for
every prompt type. This gap is highest for the least
informative prompts, indicating that the Llama 3
and GPT-3.5 base models have relatively poor cov-
erage of S. Quechua, while GPT-4o and Gemini
have much better coverage. The effect is evident in
both automatic and human quality evaluations.
Effects of prompt type are mediated by the qual-
ity of the pretrained model. Llama 3 and GPT-3.5
show a clear improvement in quality when MORPH
information is included in the prompt. Gemini also
improves when this information is added, but to
a lesser extent. GPT-4o, on the other hand, per-
forms best in response to the BASELINE (zero-shot)
prompts, which attain the highest BLEURT scores
across all models, prompt types, and retrieval meth-
ods evaluated in this study. In other words, pro-
viding additional information in the prompt’s con-
text actually degrades GPT-4o’s ability to translate
from S. Quechua to Spanish in all experimental
conditions.
5.2
Effects of Automated Retrieval
To highlight the effects of automated retrieval on
model output, we present BLEURT scores for a
selection of prompt types and all four models in
Table 3 (full scores may be found in Appendix F).
The effect of manual retrieval for MORPH informa-
tion is positive for all models, although this gap is
smallest for Gemini (probably because its perfor-
mance for these prompts is already highest). The
effect for GRAMMAR prompts is either minor or
negative.
5.3
Human Analysis of Translation Errors
The most common error type identified by the an-
notators is Substitution - Other, which includes a
diverse assortment of lexical and phrasal incongru-
encies of varying degrees of severity. These are
largely item-specific and therefore hard to charac-
terize as a group. Using the error categories de-
scribed in Section 4.4, we instead identify three
more clearly interpretable phenomena and provide
a detailed discussion of each in the following sec-
tions. We present counts for selected prompt types
in Table 4, with examples in Appendix A and
counts for all errors in Appendix G.
5.4
Mistranslations
Outright mistranslations are most common for GPT-
3.5, making up 30 of the 50 responses in the BASE-
1338

--- PAGE 8 ---
BASE
MORPH
C+G+M
Mistranslation: complete +
lexical correspondence
GPT-3.5
45
11
12
GPT-4o
4
6
4
Target Fluency: grammar +
coherence + style
GPT-3.5
0
14
10
GPT-4o
3
13
9
Grammatical Divergence:
subject + TAM
GPT-3.5
0
24
31
GPT-4o
17
13
11
Table 4: Counts of human-annotated error types (per 50 sentences) by LLM and prompt type.
LINE condition. We also consider outputs that
retain only minimal traces of the source content,
which we label as Mistranslations with Lexical
Correspondence. Approximately 1/3 of the 637
total errors tagged across all prompt types for GPT-
3.5 are mistranslations of either type, roughly split
between complete mistranslations and those with
lexical correspondence (15.07% and 18.37%, re-
spectively, of all errors tagged for GPT-3.5).
As reported in previous work, adding morpheme-
and word-level translations to the prompt greatly
reduces the rate of this kind of response. GPT-
4o also produces drastically fewer mistranslations
compared to its predecessor. However, it is notable
that both models produce at least one mistransla-
tion for each prompt type. In general, complete
mistranslations are in fluent Spanish and contain
no overt indications that something has been mis-
represented. We return to the ethical implications
of these errors in the Discussion.
We also note that many of the items tagged as
Mistranslation with Lexical Correspondence show
correspondence only for words that were already in
Spanish in the source text. For example, some sen-
tences contain Spanish loan names for the days of
the week. While some of these errors are produced
in deceptively fluent Spanish, we find many to be
accompanied by semantic incoherence or ungram-
maticality in the output. We discuss such target
language fluency errors in the following section.
5.5
Target Fluency
Target Fluency errors occur when the output is not
grammatical, coherent, or stylistically appropriate –
for instance, if an output contains a nonsensical rep-
etition or a verb with missing arguments. Outputs
of this type bear a strong similarity to human “trans-
lationese” in that structural features of the source
language may surface in the translation at the ex-
pense of naturalness (Koppel and Ordan, 2011; Fre-
itag et al., 2019). Both GPT-3.5 and GPT-4o tend
to produce more such outputs when the prompt
is more informative – 10 to 20% of the time (5-
10 instances per 50) in prompts with morpheme
translations.
5.6
Grammatical Divergence
We group misrendered verbal subjects and
tense/aspect/morphology (TAM) markers together
as Grammatical Divergence errors. Such errors are
distinct from the Target Fluency errors described in
the previous section— the Spanish output is gram-
matical, but fails to accurately reflect the content
from the source. TAM divergences are much more
prevalent than divergences in subject; for instance,
only one of GPT-4o’s 13 Grammatical Divergence
errors in the MORPH condition misrender the sub-
ject marker.
Grammatical Divergence errors are annotated
only for sentences that are not mistranslated out-
right, so GPT-3.5 produces none of these in
the BASELINE condition. For more informative
prompts, it is clear that GPT-4o is better than GPT-
3.5 at translating both functional and lexical mean-
ings. However, a relatively large number of sen-
tences (over 20%) still contain such an error even
with the highest performing model and prompt
type. The relatively small drop in error between
different prompt types for GPT-4o suggests that
neither the corpus-based usage examples nor exam-
ple paradigms and descriptions from the grammar
document can fully prevent this type of error.
6
Discussion
We observe large differences between LLMs, both
in terms of the overall quality of their generated
translations as well as the effects of prompt type
on their outputs. GPT-4o and Gemini, which have
the highest baseline scores, benefit least from ad-
ditional information— BLEURT scores actually
decrease when CORPUS and GRAMMAR informa-
tion is included. This occurs even with manually
1339

--- PAGE 9 ---
curated prompts, suggesting it is not an effect of in-
cluding irrelevant material. Nonetheless, the base-
line results do not represent a ceiling on quality,
since both models still produce errors in the BASE-
LINE condition (GPT-4o produces 10 LOW-quality
translations in our set of 50). These results suggest
that even relevant grammar explanations, when
written in prose with examples, do little to help
the newest generation of LLMs to translate a low-
resource language such as Southern Quechua.
Although GPT-4o and Gemini results are simi-
lar in many ways, we do find evidence for differ-
ences in their in-context learning abilities. Baseline
prompts and the GPT-4o model produce the high-
est BLEURT scores across the dataset, but these
outputs still show a number of errors characteristic
of LLMs, particularly lexical substitution errors
that are not necessarily corrected with the inclu-
sion of more context. In contrast, Gemini, which
has near-comparable performance across prompt
types, shows an increase in scores when prompts
include MORPH information, regardless of retrieval
type, suggesting a greater ability to identify and uti-
lize relevant word- and morph-level translations in
the prompt’s context. Previous work suggests that
newer builds of GPT-4 are less capable of following
instructions (Chen et al., 2023); such differences
may be masked by the effects of pretraining when
automatically evaluating translations. This sug-
gests that researchers should continue to carefully
select and compare among different LLMs when
experimenting with retrieval-based translation.
6.1
Language-Specific Effects
We identify a number of translation errors of vary-
ing types that appear to be due to language-specific
factors such as those discussed in Section 3.1. For
example, we find an effect of polysemous lexical
items for all prompt types in the outputs of both
models on which we conduct human evaluation.
In the most straightforward cases, the model in-
correctly generates an alternate sense of the word
that is inappropriate given the content of the source
sentence. We also find a number of instances in
which the presence of such ambiguity has a cas-
cading effect on lexical selection in the rest of the
model’s output. For example, when co-occuring
with miski in the source text, the word lawa ‘soup’
is translated at times as mazamorra, a sweet por-
ridge or pudding, crema ‘cream’, miel ‘honey’,
golosina ‘candy’, or dulces, the nominal form of
dulce meaning ‘candy’ or ‘sweets.’
It may be possible to moderate such effects with
additional refinement of the database structure and
retrieval methods, which we leave for future work.
6.2
Ethical Concerns
Both our work and much of the previous work in
this paradigm is motivated by the desire to close the
“NLP Gap” among researchers, community mem-
bers, and software developers interested in low-
resource language technologies. Machine trans-
lation is listed as a welcome topic of research by
some (though not all) members of American In-
digenous communities (Mager et al., 2023), and is
potentially an important tool for language learners
(Jolley and Maimone, 2022). Even an imperfect
translation system might be a useful tool for users
with a clear understanding of its limitations. How-
ever, the systems evaluated in this work have two
problematic tendencies that limit their potential for
deployment in real community settings.
First, unfaithful translations often tend to be
highly fluent (Section 5.4). While fluency ratings
for older MT systems correlate well with accuracy
scores, and have even been used as a proxy for
overall translation quality (Gamon et al., 2005; Es-
trella et al., 2007), this correlation is reversed for
our systems. LLMs are well-known for making
false statements that seem plausible and authori-
tative (Bickmore et al., 2018; Dinan et al., 2021);
this could be particularly problematic when they
project illusions of expertise at the expense of an
already marginalized group.
Second, some mistranslations identified in our
study appear to draw on stereotypes of Indigenous
groups (Appendix B). These are most apparent for
the BASELINE system and GPT-3.5, but also (less
frequently) occur with more informative prompts
and better LLMs. Stereotypical sentences can in-
volve flowery language with an emphasis on tradi-
tion or connectedness to nature (Erhart and Hall,
2019), as well as the unprompted addition of In-
digenous Andean cultural customs and products
(e.g., traditional medicine and chicha) to transla-
tions that are otherwise faithful to the source text.
The overall effect is to exoticize Southern Quechua
speakers and writers in ways that the original sen-
tences do not. Similar stereotypes have also been
noted in LLM-generated responses to open-ended
prompts (Cheng et al., 2023; Delgado Solorzano
and Toxtli, 2023; Shieh et al., 2024).
While we prompt models to output only the trans-
lation for evaluation purposes, models may have
1340

--- PAGE 10 ---
some capacity to explain or qualify their transla-
tions and give reminders for responsible use of the
technology. Should a retrieval-based translation
system ever be deployed in a real-world setting for
language learning, its developers should maximize
transparency by presenting the content of any re-
trieved information and its source to the user along
with the translation, reminding users directly of po-
tential inaccuracies, and offering vetted resources
for additional fact-checking when available.
7
Conclusion
Our results suggest a number of key limitations
and concerns regarding the use of LLMs in a low-
resource MT context, and have greater implications
for our understanding of the seemingly “humanlike”
conceptual, analytical, and in-context learning abil-
ities of LLMs.
For the majority of the world’s languages and
their speakers, powering and supplying LLMs with
enough pretraining data to overcome their limita-
tions is not feasible. We therefore offer the follow-
ing suggestions to those looking to develop low-
resource LLM-MT: (1) improve data structures and
methods for interacting with a language-specific
database for retrieval-aided generation, (2) con-
tinue analysis of the mechanisms driving in-context
learning in LLMs, for example by comparing ICL
to the effects of finetuning (Dai et al., 2023), and (3)
experiment with prompt structures and techniques,
for example by altering the order of information
(Liu et al., 2024) or by iteratively prompting the
model to guide its reasoning towards a suitable
translation (Wang et al., 2022).
Finally, we wish to emphasize the continued
risks of prematurely deploying this or similar meth-
ods in any low-resource language community, par-
ticularly given the vulnerability and disproportion-
ate lack of resources many such communities face
in domains where these technologies would likely
be used. As AI research continues to rapidly de-
velop, we urge those conducting it to increase com-
munity engagement, amplify the voices of those
traditionally at a disadvantage, and collaboratively
develop research infrastructures that may lessen
the NLP Gap (Brinklow, 2021). While there’s still
much to be done before low-resource LLM-MT
may be safely implemented, we believe such a
tool has the potential to empower speakers of any
variety, including nonstandard varieties of high-
resource languages such as English, to develop
technologies that reflect their preferences and serve
their unique needs.
8
Limitations
Limitations on the scope and replicability of this
work may be attributed to one or more character-
istics of the data and models used in this study,
in addition to limitations inherent to the respective
identities of its authors. First, the automatic metrics
(i.e., BLEURT and BLEU scores) that we report
are limited in their statistical validity. We have con-
ducted some constrained tests to explore potential
variance in scores, but expenses associated with
text generation using proprietary models such as
those developed by OpenAI and Google on a larger
dataset may be prohibitive. This is compounded
by the widely-acknowledged “black box” nature
of the models powering both LLMs and BLEURT,
as well as an increasing opacity with respect to the
exact content and methods used to pretrain modern
state of the art LLMs. For this reason, we focus our
discussion on those results that show clear trends
in both the quantitative and human evaluations we
conduct.
There are also some constraints on our study and
its methodology that are largely tied to linguistic
factors, such as variation in orthography (and the
need for digitized text-based resources as a pre-
requisite) as well as the lexical and grammatical
variation that may be found in all languages, partic-
ularly the low-resource varieties we wish to support.
We discuss some of these factors in Sections 3.1
and 6.1. Our results suggest it may be possible
to guide the outputs of LLMs towards the specific
usage conventions of a given community, but this is
itself limited by the content of the materials used to
develop the database from which prompt contexts
are retrieved.
Neither of the authors is a native speaker of any
Quechua or Spanish varieties, and only one is a
student of these languages and has relationships
to Quechua speakers and communities. While we
have strived to be consistent in the Quechua and
Spanish varieties used in our study (both the dic-
tionary and grammar materials were provided by
the same instructor who shared and proofread the
50 sentence pairs we use, and we select a morpho-
logical parser and corpora intended for use with
Southern Quechua), variation is widespread among
and within Quechua-speaking communities, and
we do not have access to a dictionary, grammar,
1341

--- PAGE 11 ---
morphological parser, and corpus developed by a
unified and consistent set of authors. Future work
should continue to explore ways to faithfully rep-
resent the diversity of linguistic conventions em-
ployed by communities interested in developing
such technologies.
We acknowledge, as well, limitations that arise
from the size of our dataset and database and the
methods used to curate them. The 50 sentence
pairs we use were selected to highlight a range of
specific grammatical phenomena, not all of which
were well represented in our database, and dif-
fer in their structural complexity. We are grateful
for the guidance provided by the Quechua instruc-
tor whose lessons were a source for such exam-
ples and proofread the sentences before their in-
clusion in our experiments, but are limited by our
status as non-native speakers. Human evaluation
of model outputs was partially conducted using
machine-translated English texts as references, but
all annotations were inspected by the Spanish- and
Quechua-speaking author who removed a small
number of evaluations that reflected linguistic dis-
crepancies between Quechua, Spanish, and English
or inaccuracies in the machine-translated English.
9
Ethics Statement
We consulted the first author’s Quechua instructor,
Prof. Carmen Cazorla Zen, who gave us permis-
sion to use the sentences from the notes in this
project and verified their accuracy. We cite the
Quechua dictionary and grammar materials used
to provide prompt information, and believe that
our use of these materials is consonant with their
original purpose. However, we do not distribute
machine-readable versions of them as a contribu-
tion of this project, since this would violate the
rights of the publisher. These materials were de-
veloped for use as pedagogical resources by insti-
tutions affiliated with the governments of Cuzco,
Peru and Apurímac, Peru, respectively. Their au-
thors were not contacted or consulted as part of the
project.
We wish to acknowledge the delicate issue of
academic extractiveness and its harmful impact
on Indigenous and minority language communi-
ties and speakers. We are also aware of some of
the controversial ideologies and policies associated
with Qheswa Simi Hamut’ana Kuraq Suntur, the
government-afilliated institution who published the
dictionary we use in this study, and the potentially
negative effects of government-sponsored linguis-
tic standardization more broadly (see, e.g., Coro-
nel Molina (2008) for an analysis of the effects
of the institution’s ideologies on revitalization ef-
forts in Peru). We do not endorse such policies,
and have sought to avoid representing the diversity
of Southern Quechua-speaking communities as a
monolith. Instead, we hope our continued efforts to
improve methods for low-resource translation will
empower speakers of Southern Quechua and other
Indigenous and minority languages to develop lan-
guage technologies capable of representing their
own community’s unique language variety to serve
the unique needs of its speakers.
There are numerous ethical issues related to the
training and use of LLMs, such as labor issues and
energy costs. While these issues are inextricable
from the methods used in this project, we believe
the potential impact of making low-resource trans-
lation viable and accessible to minority language
communities who want them (our primary goal in
this line of research) outweighs the problems inher-
ent in using LLMs at all. We discuss the potential
risks of deploying systems like the ones described
here further in Section 6.2 of the main text.
Acknowledgments
We thank Prof. Carmen Cazorla Zen, Professor
of Quechua, for her help curating the data used
in this study and for deepening our understanding
of Southern Quechua and its speakers. We also
thank Prof. Elvia Andía Grágeda, Professor of
Quechua, for her instruction and advice, and the
OSU Linguistics department for their feedback on
a preliminary presentation of the work.
References
Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman,
Diogo Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman,
Shyamal Anadkat, et al. 2023. GPT-4 technical re-
port. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774. See also:
https://openai.com/index/hello-gpt-4o/.
Milind Agarwal, Sweta Agrawal, Antonios Anasta-
sopoulos, Luisa Bentivogli, Ondˇrej Bojar, Claudia
Borg, Marine Carpuat, Roldano Cattoni, Mauro
Cettolo,
Mingda Chen,
William Chen,
et al.
2023. FINDINGS OF THE IWSLT 2023 EVAL-
UATION CAMPAIGN.
In Proceedings of the
20th International Conference on Spoken Language
Translation (IWSLT 2023), pages 1–61, Toronto,
Canada (in-person and online). Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
1342

--- PAGE 12 ---
Željko Agi´c and Ivan Vuli´c. 2019. JW300: A wide-
coverage parallel corpus for low-resource languages.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, pages
3204–3210, Florence, Italy. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Sweta Agrawal, Chunting Zhou, Mike Lewis, Luke
Zettlemoyer, and Marjan Ghazvininejad. 2022. In-
context examples selection for machine translation.
Preprint, arXiv:2212.02437.
AI@Meta. 2024. Llama 3 model card.
Timothy W Bickmore, Ha Trinh, Stefan Olafsson,
Teresa K O’Leary, Reza Asadi, Nathaniel M Rick-
les, and Ricardo Cruz. 2018. Patient and consumer
safety risks when using conversational assistants for
medical information: An observational study of Siri,
Alexa, and Google Assistant. J Med Internet Res,
20(9):e11510.
Nathan Thanyehténhas Brinklow. 2021. Indigenous lan-
guage technologies: Anti-colonial oases in a coloniz-
ing (digital) world. WINHEC: International Journal
of Indigenous Education Scholarship, (1):239–266.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell,
et al. 2020.
Language models are
few-shot learners.
Preprint, arXiv:2005.14165.
See also: https://openai.com/index/new-embedding-
models-and-api-updates/.
Aljoscha Burchardt. 2013.
Multidimensional qual-
ity metrics: a flexible system for assessing trans-
lation quality. In Proceedings of Translating and the
Computer 35, London, UK. Aslib.
Ronald Cardenas, Rodolfo Zevallos, Reynaldo Ba-
querizo, and Luis Camacho. 2018. Siminchik: A
speech corpus for preservation of Southern Quechua.
ISI-NLP, 2:21.
Lingjiao Chen, Matei Zaharia, and James Zou. 2023.
Analyzing chatgpt’s behavior shifts over time. In
R0-FoMo: Robustness of Few-shot and Zero-shot
Learning in Large Foundation Models.
Myra Cheng, Esin Durmus, and Dan Jurafsky. 2023.
Marked personas: Using natural language prompts
to measure stereotypes in language models.
In
Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume
1: Long Papers), pages 1504–1532, Toronto, Canada.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Serafín M. Coronel Molina. 2008. Language Ideologies
of the High Academy of the Quechua Language in
Cuzco, Peru. Latin American and Caribbean Ethnic
Studies, 3(3):319–340.
Ryan Cotterell, Christo Kirov, John Sylak-Glassman,
Géraldine Walther, Ekaterina Vylomova, Arya D. Mc-
Carthy, Katharina Kann, Sabrina J. Mielke, Garrett
Nicolai, Miikka Silfverberg, David Yarowsky, Ja-
son Eisner, and Mans Hulden. 2020. The CoNLL–
SIGMORPHON 2018 shared task: Universal mor-
phological reinflection. Preprint, arXiv:1810.07125.
Damai Dai, Yutao Sun, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Shuming
Ma, Zhifang Sui, and Furu Wei. 2023. Why can GPT
learn in-context? Language models implicitly per-
form gradient descent as meta-optimizers. Preprint,
arXiv:2212.10559.
Cecilia Delgado Solorzano and Carlos Toxtli. 2023.
Evaluating machine perception of Indigeneity: An
analysis of ChatGPT’s perceptions of Indigenous
roles in diverse scenarios.
Emily Dinan, Gavin Abercrombie, A. Stevie Bergman,
Shannon Spruit, Dirk Hovy, Y-Lan Boureau, and Ver-
ena Rieser. 2021. Anticipating safety issues in E2E
conversational AI: Framework and tooling. Preprint,
arXiv:2107.03451.
Abteen Ebrahimi, Manuel Mager, Arturo Oncevay,
Vishrav Chaudhary, Luis Chiruzzo, Angela Fan, John
Ortega, Ricardo Ramos, Annette Rios, Ivan Vladimir
Meza Ruiz, et al. 2022.
AmericasNLI: Evaluat-
ing zero-shot natural language understanding of pre-
trained multilingual models in truly low-resource lan-
guages. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 6279–6299, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Abteen Ebrahimi, Manuel Mager, Shruti Rijhwani,
Enora Rice, Arturo Oncevay, Claudia Baltazar, María
Cortés, Cynthia Montaño, John E. Ortega, Rolando
Coto-solano, Hilaria Cruz, Alexis Palmer, and Katha-
rina Kann. 2023.
Findings of the AmericasNLP
2023 shared task on machine translation into Indige-
nous languages. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Natural Language Processing for Indigenous
Languages of the Americas (AmericasNLP), pages
206–219, Toronto, Canada. Association for Compu-
tational Linguistics.
Micha Elsner and Jordan Needle. 2023.
Translat-
ing a low-resource language using GPT-3 and a
human-readable dictionary. In Proceedings of the
20th SIGMORPHON workshop on Computational
Research in Phonetics, Phonology, and Morphology,
pages 1–13, Toronto, Canada. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Ryan S Erhart and Deborah L Hall. 2019. A descriptive
and comparative analysis of the content of stereo-
types about Native Americans.
Race and Social
Problems, 11:225–242.
Paula Estrella, Andrei Popescu-Belis, and Maghi King.
2007. A new method for the study of correlations be-
tween MT evaluation metrics. In Proceedings of the
11th Conference on Theoretical and Methodological
Issues in Machine Translation of Natural Languages:
Papers, Skövde, Sweden.
1343

--- PAGE 13 ---
Markus Freitag, Isaac Caswell, and Scott Roy. 2019.
APE at scale and its implications on MT evaluation
biases. In Proceedings of the Fourth Conference on
Machine Translation (Volume 1: Research Papers),
pages 34–44, Florence, Italy. Association for Com-
putational Linguistics.
Michael Gamon, Anthony Aue, and Martine Smets.
2005.
Sentence-level MT evaluation without ref-
erence translations:
Beyond language modeling.
In Proceedings of the 10th EAMT Conference:
Practical applications of machine translation.
Luke Gessler. 2022. Closing the NLP gap: Documen-
tary linguistics and NLP need a shared software in-
frastructure. In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop
on the Use of Computational Methods in the Study
of Endangered Languages, pages 119–126, Dublin,
Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Marjan Ghazvininejad, Hila Gonen, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2023. Dictionary-based phrase-level prompt-
ing of large language models for machine translation.
Preprint, arXiv:2302.07856.
Amr Hendy, Mohamed Abdelrehim, Amr Sharaf,
Vikas Raunak, Mohamed Gabr, Hitokazu Matsushita,
Young Jin Kim, Mohamed Afify, and Hany Has-
san Awadalla. 2023. How good are GPT models
at machine translation? A comprehensive evaluation.
Preprint, arXiv:2302.09210.
Jason R Jolley and Luciane Maimone. 2022. Thirty
years of machine translation in language teaching
and learning: A review of the literature. L2 Journal,
14(1):26–44.
Tom Kocmi, Eleftherios Avramidis, Rachel Bawden,
Ondˇrej Bojar, Anton Dvorkovich, Christian Feder-
mann, Mark Fishel, Markus Freitag, Thamme Gowda,
Roman Grundkiewicz, Barry Haddow, et al. 2023.
Findings of the 2023 Conference on Machine Trans-
lation (WMT23): LLMs are here but not quite there
yet.
In Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on
Machine Translation, pages 1–42, Singapore. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Moshe Koppel and Noam Ordan. 2011. Translationese
and its dialects. In Proceedings of the 49th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages
1318–1326, Portland, Oregon, USA. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Nelson F. Liu, Kevin Lin, John Hewitt, Ashwin Paran-
jape, Michele Bevilacqua, Fabio Petroni, and Percy
Liang. 2024. Lost in the Middle: How Language
Models Use Long Contexts.
Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 12:157–
173.
Zoey Liu, Crystal Richardson, Richard Hatcher, and
Emily Prud’hommeaux. 2022. Not always about
you: Prioritizing community needs when developing
endangered language technology. In Proceedings
of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long
Papers), pages 3933–3944, Dublin, Ireland. Asso-
ciation for Computational Linguistics.
Hongyuan Lu, Haoyang Huang, Dongdong Zhang, Hao-
ran Yang, Wai Lam, and Furu Wei. 2023. Chain-
of-dictionary prompting elicits translation in large
language models. Preprint, arXiv:2305.06575.
Manuel Mager, Elisabeth Mager, Katharina Kann, and
Ngoc Thang Vu. 2023.
Ethical considerations
for machine translation of Indigenous languages:
Giving a voice to the speakers.
In Proceedings
of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long
Papers), pages 4871–4897, Toronto, Canada. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics.
Manuel Mager, Arturo Oncevay, Abteen Ebrahimi, John
Ortega, Annette Rios, Angela Fan, Ximena Gutierrez-
Vasques, Luis Chiruzzo, Gustavo Giménez-Lugo, Ri-
cardo Ramos, et al. 2021. Findings of the Amer-
icasNLP 2021 shared task on open machine trans-
lation for Indigenous languages of the Americas.
In Proceedings of the First Workshop on Natural
Language Processing for Indigenous Languages of
the Americas, pages 202–217, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
R Thomas McCoy, Shunyu Yao, Dan Friedman,
Matthew Hardy, and Thomas L Griffiths. 2023. Em-
bers of autoregression: Understanding large language
models through the problem they are trained to solve.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.13638.
Gabriel Nicholas and Aliya Bhatia. 2023. Lost in trans-
lation: Large language models in non-english content
analysis. Preprint, arXiv:2306.07377.
John E Ortega, Richard Castro Mamani, and Kyunghyun
Cho. 2020.
Neural machine translation with a
polysynthetic low resource language.
Machine
Translation, 34(4):325–346.
Miguel Ángel Pinto Tapia, Luis Quispe Zúñiga, et al.
2005. Didáctica quechua i. Documento de trabajo,
Dirección Regional de Educación Apurímac | Direc-
ción Gestión Pedagógica.
Qheswa
Simi
Hamut’ana
Kurak
Suntur.
2005.
Diccionario Quechua - Español - Quechua Qheswa -
Español - Qheswa Simi Taqe, 2 edition. Multiservi-
cios e Imprenta Edmundo Pantigozo EIRL, Cusco,
Peru.
Machel Reid, Nikolay Savinov, Denis Teplyashin,
Dmitry Lepikhin, Timothy Lillicrap, Jean-Baptiste
Alayrac, Radu Soricut, Angeliki Lazaridou, Orhan Fi-
rat, Julian Schrittwieser, et al. 2024. Gemini 1.5: Un-
locking multimodal understanding across millions of
tokens of context. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05530.
Katherine
J.
Riestenberg,
Ally
Freemond,
Brook Danielle Lillehaugen,
and Jonathan N.
Washington. 2024. Prioritizing Community Partners’
Goals in Projects to Support Indigenous Language
1344

--- PAGE 14 ---
Revitalization. In Decolonizing Linguistics. Oxford
University Press.
Annette Rios. 2015.
A basic language technology
toolkit for Quechua.
Ph.D. thesis, University of
Zurich.
Annette Rios and Richard Castro Mamani. 2014. Mor-
phological disambiguation and text normalization for
southern Quechua varieties.
Stephen Robertson, Hugo Zaragoza, et al. 2009. The
probabilistic relevance framework: Bm25 and be-
yond.
Foundations and Trends in Information
Retrieval, 3(4):333–389.
Nathaniel Robinson, Perez Ogayo, David R. Mortensen,
and Graham Neubig. 2023. ChatGPT MT: Competi-
tive for high- (but not low-) resource languages. In
Proceedings of the Eighth Conference on Machine
Translation, pages 392–418, Singapore. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Ohad Rubin, Jonathan Herzig, and Jonathan Berant.
2022. Learning to retrieve prompts for in-context
learning.
In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association
for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 2655–2671, Seattle, United
States. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Sylvia L.R. Schreiner, Lane Schwartz, Benjamin
Hunt, and Emily Chen. 2020.
Multidirectional
leveraging for computational morphology and lan-
guage documentation and revitalization. Language
documentation and conservation, 14.
Thibault Sellam, Dipanjan Das, and Ankur P. Parikh.
2020. BLEURT: Learning robust metrics for text
generation. Preprint, arXiv:2004.04696.
Evan Shieh, Faye-Marie Vassel, Cassidy Sugimoto, and
Thema Monroe-White. 2024. Laissez-faire harms:
Algorithmic biases in generative language models.
Preprint, arXiv:2404.07475.
David Stap and Ali Araabi. 2023.
ChatGPT
is
not
a
good
Indigenous
translator.
In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural Language
Processing
for
Indigenous
Languages
of
the
Americas (AmericasNLP), pages 163–167, Toronto,
Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Garrett Tanzer, Mirac Suzgun, Eline Visser, Dan Juraf-
sky, and Luke Melas-Kyriazi. 2024. A benchmark
for learning to translate a new language from one
grammar book. Preprint, arXiv:2309.16575.
Jörg Tiedemann. 2012.
Parallel data, tools and in-
terfaces in OPUS.
In Proceedings of the Eighth
International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation (LREC’12), pages 2214–2218, Istan-
bul, Turkey. European Language Resources Associa-
tion (ELRA).
Atnafu Lambebo Tonja, Fazlourrahman Balouchzahi,
Sabur Butt, Olga Kolesnikova, Hector Ceballos,
Alexander Gelbukh, and Thamar Solorio. 2024. NLP
progress in Indigenous Latin American languages.
Preprint, arXiv:2404.05365.
Boshi Wang, Xiang Deng, and Huan Sun. 2022. Itera-
tively prompt pre-trained language models for chain
of thought. Preprint, arXiv:2203.08383.
Rodolfo Zevallos, John Ortega, William Chen, Richard
Castro, Núria Bel, Cesar Toshio, Renzo Venturas,
Hilario Aradiel, and Nelsi Melgarejo. 2022. Intro-
ducing QuBERT: A large monolingual corpus and
BERT model for Southern Quechua. In Proceedings
of the Third Workshop on Deep Learning for
Low-Resource Natural Language Processing, pages
1–13, Hybrid. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Chen Zhang, Xiao Liu, Jiuheng Lin, and Yansong Feng.
2024. Teaching large language models an unseen
language on the fly. Preprint, arXiv:2402.19167.
1345

--- PAGE 15 ---
A
Example Errors
The following section provides examples of errors
analyzed in Section 5.3, one error per type.
Mistranslation: Complete Mistranslation
Model: GPT-3.5 - BASELINE - AUTO
Source:
qamqa taytaykipa munasqan lawata
yanurqanki
Gloss:
qam-qa
you-TOP
tayta-yki-pa
father-2.POSS-GEN
muna-sqa-n
like-SUBR-3SG
lawa-ta
soup-ACC
yanu-rqa-nki
cook-PST-2SG
Reference: tú cocinaste la sopita que le gusta a tu
papá
you cooked the soup that your dad likes
Output: yo te quiero mucho y mi amor por ti
nunca se acabará
I love you very much and my love for you will
never end
Mistranslation: Lexical Correspondence
Model: GPT-4o - C+G+M - AUTO
Source:
ñuqaqa illani runakunawan rimayta
munaptiy
Gloss:
ñuqa-qa
I-TOP
illa-ni
travel-1SG
runa-kuna-wan
person-PL-with
rima-y-ta
speak-ACC
muna-pti-y
like-SUBR-1SG
Reference: yo viajo porque me gustar hablar con
las personas
I travel because I like to talk to people
Output: yo quiero hablar con las personas cuando
amanece
I want to talk to people when the sun rises
Target Fluency: Coherence
Unresolvable pronoun
Model: GPT-3.5 - C+G+M -AUTO
Source: qamqa yachayta tukuptiyki, puñunki
Gloss:
qam-qa
you-TOP
yacha-y-ta
study-INF-ACC
tuku-pti-yki,
finish-SUBR-2SG,
puñu-nki
sleep-2SG
Reference:
cuando termines de estudiar, tu
duermes
when you finish studying, you sleep
Output: acabaré de aprender lo que tú duermes
I will finish learning what you sleep
Target Fluency: Grammar
Missing causative and possessive
Model: GPT-4o - CORPUS - AUTO
Source: ñuqaqa ñañayman wasita pichachini
Gloss:
ñuqa-qa
I-TOP
ñaña-y-man
sister-1SG.POSS-ILL
wasi-ta
house-ACC
picha-chi-ni
clean-CAUS-1SG
Reference:
yo le hago limpiar la casa a mi
hermana
I make my sister clean the house
Output: yo hermana casa limpio
I sister house clean
Grammatical Divergence: TAM
Tense
Model: GPT-3.5 - C+G+M - AUTO
Source: qam allinta tusunki
Gloss:
qam
you
allin-ta
good-ACC
tusu-nki
dance-2SG
Reference: tu bailas bien
you dance well
Output: tú bailarás bien
you will dance well
1346

--- PAGE 16 ---
Grammatical Divergence: Subject
‘you’ to ‘I’
Model: GPT-3.5 - MORPH - AUTO
Source: qamqa mamaykipa wasinta yanuq rinki
Gloss:
qam-qa
you-TOP
mama-yki-pa
mother-2.POSS-GEN
wasi-n-ta
house-3SG.POSS-ACC
yanu-q
cook-AGT
ri-nki
go-2SG
Reference: tú irás a cocinar a la casa de tu mamá
you will go to cook at your mother’s house
Output: voy a cocinar en la casa de tu madre
I’m going to cook at your mother’s house
Grammatical Divergence: Subject
‘you’ to ‘the man’
Model: GPT-4o - C+G+M - AUTO
Source:
qamqa misita qawaspa qari warata
awachkarqanki
Gloss:
qam-qa
you-TOP
misi-ta
cat-ACC
qawa-spa
watch-SUBR
qari
male
wara-ta
pants-ACC
awa-chka-rqa-nki
knit-PROG-PST-2SG
Reference: tú estabas tejiendo un pantalón de
varón mirando al gato
you were knitting a pair of men’s pants looking at
the cat
Output: tú mirabas al gato mientras el hombre
tejía el pantalón
you looked at the cat while the man knitted the
pants
Grammatical Divergence: TAM
Missing conditional
Model: GPT-4o - MORPH - AUTO
Source: qam runasimita yachapayaptiyki, allintam
rimanki
Gloss:
qam
you
runa-simi-ta
people-mouth-ACC
yacha-paya-pti-yki,
learn-REP-COND-2SG,
allin-ta-m
good-ACC-ASRT
rima-nki
speak-2SG
Reference: si practicas el quechua lo hablarás bien
if you practice Quechua you will speak it well
Output: tú ya sabías el runasimi, hablas muy bien
you already knew runasimi, you speak very well
1347

--- PAGE 17 ---
B
Unprompted Stereotypes
The following section provides examples of errors
involving cultural stereotypes as discussed in
Section 6.2.
Model: GPT-3.5 - BASELINE - AUTO
Source: payqa qatupi ñañanpa rantisqan apita
rurarqan
Gloss:
pay-qa
3-TOP
qatu-pi
market-LOC
ñaña-n-pa
sister-3SG.POSS-GEN
ranti-sqa-n
buy-SUBR-3SG
api-ta
mazamorra-ACC
rura-rqa-n
make-PST-3SG
Reference:
ella preparó una mazamorra que
compró su hermana en el mercado
she prepared a mazamorra [pudding] that her
sister bought at the market
Output: el sol brilla en nuestra tierra, calienta y
nos da vida
the sun shines on our land, warms us and gives us
life
Model: GPT-3.5 - GRAMMAR
Source:
paykunaqa yachachiqninkupa rakta
medicina liwru apasqanta likanku
Gloss:
pay-kuna-qa
3-PL-TOP
yacha-chi-q-ni-nku-pa
learn-CAUS-AGT-NI-3PL.POSS-GEN
rakta
thick
medicina
medicine
liwru
book
apa-sqa-n-ta
carry-SUBR-3SG-ACC
lika-nku
read-3PL
Reference: ellos leerán el libro grueso de medicina
que trajo su profesor
they will read the thick medical book that their
teacher brought
Output:
los médicos de la comunidad nos
enseñaron a utilizar plantas medicinales
the doctors from the community taught us how to
use medicinal plants
Model: GPT-4o - BASELINE
Source: qamkunapa taytamamaykichikta watuku-
naykichik, paykunata purikuq apanaykichik
Gloss:
qam-kuna-pa
you-PL-GEN
tayta-mama-ykichik-ta
father-mother-2PL.POSS-ACC
watuku-na-ykichik,
visit-must-2PL,
pay-kuna-ta
3-PL-ACC
puri-ku-q
walk-enjoy-AGT
apa-na-ykichik
bring-must-2PL
Reference: ustedes tienen que visitar a sus padres
y llevarlos a pasear
you have to visit your parents and take them for a
walk
Output:
ustedes deben honrar a sus padres,
guiarlos en su camino
you must honor your parents, guide them on their
path
Model: Gemini 1.5 - BASELINE
Source: ñuqaqa upyayta munani
Gloss:
ñuqa-qa
I-TOP
upya-y-ta
drink-INF-ACC
muna-ni
want-1SG
Reference: yo quiero beber
I want to drink
Output: yo quiero beber chicha
I want to drink chicha
1348

--- PAGE 18 ---
C
Quality Descriptions
Quality
Description
High
Output is an accurate and/or acceptable translation of the source content.
Med
Output contains errors that prevent it from being an acceptable translation, but is generally
high in quality otherwise.
Low
Output contains errors that prevent it from being an acceptable translation, with minor
correspondences that vaguely identify it as relevant to the source.
None
Output does not appear to be relevant to the source.
Table 5: Quality Descriptions
D
Annotation Error Typology
Dimension
Error
Description
Accuracy
Addition
Translation includes information not present in the source, but does
not result in the displacement of source content.
Accuracy
Omission
Translation is missing content from the source.
Accuracy
Substitution - Subject
The translated segment contains content identified as relevant to the
source in other spans, but substitutes novel subject markers for those
present in the source in the highlighted span; Classify an error as a
“substitution” when the error appears to result in both Addition and
Omission errors that cannot be distinguished into two distinct spans.
Accuracy
Substitution - TAM
The translated segment contains content identified as relevant to the
source in other spans, but substitutes novel TAM for those present in
the source in the highlighted span; Classify an error as a “substitution”
when the error appears to result in both Addition and Omission errors
that cannot be distinguished into two distinct spans.
Accuracy
Substitution - Other
Substitution errors that do not involve mistranslated subject markers or
TAM. See above.
Accuracy
Overtranslation
Error occurring in the target content that is inappropriately more
specific than the source content.
Accuracy
Undertranslation
Error occurring in the target content that is inappropriately less spe-
cific than the source content.
Target Error
Grammar
Other spans in the translated segment may be identified as relevant to
the source, but the highlighted span is not grammatical in the target
language.
Target Error
Coherence
Other spans in the translated segment may be identified as relevant to
the source, but the highlighted span is unnatural or incoherent in the
target language.
Target Error
Style/Register
Other spans in the translated segment may be identified as relevant to
the source, but the highlighted span is produced in a style or register
that is inappropriate given the content.
Non-Translation
Complete Mistransla-
tion
The entire segment is coherent in the target language but the core
predicate shows no immediate connection to the reference translation.
Non-Translation
Mistranslation - Lexical
Correspondence
The entire segment is coherent in the target language but only minor
correspondences to the reference translation may be identified.
Non-Translation
Refusal
Model does not attempt to translate into the target language, e.g.,
because it "does not understand".
Model error
Garbled
Output does not contain coherent text in the target language.
Model error
ChattyGPT
Output contains translated content, but is wordy, over-explanatory,
and/or abruptly truncated.
Table 6: Adapted MQM typology for human error annotation
1349

--- PAGE 19 ---
E
Example Prompts
The following are examples of prompts generated
used automated retrieval from the database.
English is included in italics for the reader, but was
not provided to the models as part of the prompt.
BASELINE
[TAREA] Traduce la siguiente frase del quechua al
español. Responde sólo con la traducción:
quechua: qam allinta tusunki
español:
[TASK] Translate the following sentence from
Quechua to Spanish.
Respond only with the
translation:
Quechua: You dance well
Spanish:
MORPHS-ONLY
[CONTEXTO]
qam: [PrnPers+2sg]
allin: bueno [ ˆDB][NRoot]
ta: [+Acc][Cas]
tusu: bailar [VRoot][ ˆDB]
nki: [+2sg.Subj][VPers]
allin. adj. Bueno (término de aprobación). SINÓN:
kusa. EJEM: allin p’unchay, buenos días: allin tuta,
buenas noches; allin tutamanta, buena mañana,
buenos días; allin inti chinkay, buenas tardes;
allin iñiyniyoq, de buena fe, fiel, justo, íntegro:
allin nunayoq, de espíritu bueno; allin puriq,
de comportamiento bueno; allin puriy, compor-
tamiento bueno; allin rikuy, tratamiento bueno;
allin rikuq, el que trata bien; allin ruway, obrar
bien, beneficiar; lo que se hace bien, beneficioso;
allin ruwaq, el que hace bien; allin yuyay, pensar
bien; pensamiento bueno; allin qolqeyoq, poseedor
de plata fina; adinerado.
ta. s. Gram. Sufijo que desempeña los papeles de
artículo y preposición. EJEM: llamata qatiy, arrea
la llama; Urkusmanta hamuni, vengo de Urcos.
[TAREA] Traduce la siguiente frase . . .
[CONTEXT]
qam: [PrnPers+2sg]
allin: bueno [ ˆDB][NRoot]
ta: [+Acc][Cas]
tusu: bailar [VRoot][ ˆDB]
nki: [+2sg.Subj][VPers]
allin. adj. Good (term of approval). SYN: kusa.
EX: allin p’unchay, good day: allin tuta, good
evening; allin tutamanta, good morning, good day;
allin inti chinkay, good afternoon; allin iñiyniyoq,
good faith, faithful, just, upright: allin nunayoq, in
good spirits; allin puriq, well behaved; allin puriy,
good behavior; allin rikuy, good treatment; allin
rikuq, one who treats others well; allin ruway, to
do good, to benefit; one who does good, beneficial;
allin ruwaq, one who does good; allin yuyay, think
well; good thought; allin qolqeyoq, possessor of
fine silver; wealthy.
ta.
s.
Gram.
Suffix that plays the roles of
article and preposition. EX: llamata qatiy, herd
the llama; Urkusmanta hamuni, I come from Urcos.
[TASK] Translate the following sentence . . .
GRAMMAR-ONLY
[CONTEXTO]
ta: CASO ACUSATIVO. Su marca es –ta, esta es
una marca de objeto directo con los verbos que no
son de movimiento (quietud). Ejemplo:
Quyllur–ta qhawani Veo una estrella
T’anta–ta apay Lleva pan
Ñuqa quylluyta qhawani
Pedrucha t’antata rantin
En cambio con los verbos de movimiento –ta
indica (hacia) que es igual a meta. Ejemplos:
Punu–ta rini Voy a Puno
Llaqta-ta risaq Iré al pueblo
Hamawt’anchis Punuta rinqa
Llanta umalliq llaqtata richkan
nki: FLEXIÓN DE TIEMPO. TIEMPO FUTURO.
TIEMPO FUTURO. Los sufijos para cada una
de las personas gramaticales son: saq, nki, nqa,
sun, saqku, nkichis, nqaku; en singular y plural
respectivamente.
Ejemplos:
Puklla-saq jugaré
Puklla-nki jugarás
Puklla-nqa jugará
Puklla-sun jugaremos
Puklla-saqku jugaremos
Puklla-nkichis Uds. jugarán
Puklla-nqaku ellos jugarán
[TAREA] Traduce la siguiente frase . . .
1350

--- PAGE 20 ---
[CONTEXT]
ta: ACCUSATIVE CASE. Marked by –ta, this is a
direct object marker with verbs that don’t indicate
movement. Example:
Quyllur–ta qhawani I see a star
T’anta–ta apay Bring bread
Ñuqa quylluyta qhawani
Pedrucha t’antata rantin
On the other hand, with verbs of motion -ta
indicates (towards) the same goal Examples:
Punu–ta rini I go to Puno
Llaqta-ta risaq I will go to town
Hamawt’anchis Punuta rinqa
Llanta umalliq llaqtata richkan
nki:
TENSE INFLECTION. FUTURE TENSE.
FUTURE TENSE. The suffixes for each of the
grammatical persons are: saq, nki, nqa, sun, saqku,
nkichis, nqaku; in singular and plural respectively.
Ejemplos:
Puklla-saq jugaré
Puklla-nki jugarás
Puklla-nqa jugará
Puklla-sun jugaremos
Puklla-saqku jugaremos
Puklla-nkichis Uds. jugarán
Puklla-nqaku ellos jugarán
[TASK] Translate the following sentence . . .
CORPUS-ONLY
[CONTEXTO]
quechua: rimanakunapaq wawakunapa rimasqan
simi
aswan
allinta
takyachinaraq
piwanpas
maywanpas
mana
manchakuspa
rimananpaq
chaymi qillqanapaqpas ñawichanapaqpas aswan
allin kanqa
español: para este diálogo saber la lengua que
dominan los niños sería importante para que ellos
se expresen sin miedo de ahí será que la escritura y
la lectura salga de manera óptima
quechua:
kay tiqsipi sumaq rimanakunapaqa
kawsayninchikmi allinta kallpachawanchik runaku-
nahina allinta tiyanapaq chaymi ñuqanchikkqa
allinta ñawichayta qillqayta yachananchik ñawpa
ayllunchikkuna rurasqankuta maytukunapi tukuy
puyñukunapi tiqsi muyu qhawarisqankuta
español:
para vivir en armonía tenemos que
conocer bien nuestra forma de vivir y luego
escribir leer tambien a valorar lo que nos dejaron
nuestros antecesores en cada visión sobre el mundo
quechua:
winsislawcha chayarqamuptinsi tu-
parquspanku allinta qatunakusqanku suwakuypi
purinankupaq
español: cuando había llegado wenseslau y a su
encuentro se habían reforzarón para andar a robar
[TAREA] Traduce la siguiente frase . . .
[CONTEXT]
quechua: rimanakunapaq wawakunapa rimasqan
simi
aswan
allinta
takyachinaraq
piwanpas
maywanpas mana manchakuspa rimananpaq
chaymi qillqanapaqpas ñawichanapaqpas aswan
allin kanqa
Spanish: For this dialogue, knowing the language
that the children speak would be important for
them to express themselves without fear, and that
is why writing and reading will be optimal.
quechua:
kay tiqsipi sumaq rimanakunapaqa
kawsayninchikmi allinta kallpachawanchik runaku-
nahina allinta tiyanapaq chaymi ñuqanchikkqa
allinta ñawichayta qillqayta yachananchik ñawpa
ayllunchikkuna rurasqankuta maytukunapi tukuy
puyñukunapi tiqsi muyu qhawarisqankuta
Spanish:To live in harmony we have to know our
way of life well and then write and read to also
value what our ancestors left us in each vision of
the world.
quechua:
winsislawcha chayarqamuptinsi tu-
parquspanku allinta qatunakusqanku suwakuypi
purinankupaq
español: cuando había llegado wenseslau y a
su encuentro se habían reforzarón para andar a
robar
[TASK] Translate the following sentence . . .
1351

--- PAGE 21 ---
F
Full Quality Scores
This section contains tables showing all automatic and human-annotated quality scores for each of our
experiments. Table 7 contains the full set of BLEURT scores summarized in Tables 1 and 3 of the main
text. Table 8 shows the corresponding BLEU scores for the same experiments. Table 9 and Table 10
contain the full set of the human-annotated scores summarized in Table 3.
GPT-3.5
GPT-4o
Gemini-1.5
Llama 3
auto
manual
auto
manual
auto
manual
auto
manual
BASELINE
0.19
0.22
0.66
0.66
0.56
0.57
0.15
0.16
CORPUS-ONLY
0.27
0.29
0.59
0.61
0.49
0.47
0.19
0.18
GRAMMAR-ONLY
0.23
0.24
0.56
0.58
0.55
0.54
0.17
0.15
MORPH-ONLY
0.44
0.56
0.54
0.63
0.61
0.66
0.39
0.49
CORPUS-GRAMMAR
0.26
0.28
0.59
0.59
0.54
0.53
0.21
0.21
CORPUS-MORPH
0.44
0.52
0.59
0.64
0.59
0.64
0.36
0.38
GRAMMAR-MORPH
0.41
0.54
0.53
0.61
0.61
0.64
0.39
0.37
CORPUS-GRAMMAR-MORPH
0.43
0.54
0.57
0.63
0.61
0.63
0.15
0.26
Table 7: BLEURT scores for all LLMs and prompt types.
GPT-3.5
GPT-4o
Gemini-1.5 Pro
Llama 3 8B
auto
manual
auto
manual
auto
manual
auto
manual
BASELINE
0.01
0.02
0.19
0.18
0.12
0.14
0.00
0.00
CORPUS-ONLY
0.02
0.02
0.16
0.22
0.14
0.13
0.02
0.01
GRAMMAR-ONLY
0.01
0.03
0.14
0.12
0.18
0.17
0.01
0.01
MORPHS-ONLY
0.06
0.08
0.12
0.13
0.15
0.18
0.03
0.05
CORPUS-GRAMMAR
0.01
0.01
0.14
0.17
0.12
0.08
0.01
0.01
CORPUS-MORPHS
0.05
0.08
0.19
0.18
0.17
0.17
0.02
0.04
GRAMMAR-MORPHS
0.03
0.04
0.11
0.10
0.15
0.16
0.02
0.01
CORPUS-GRAMMAR-MORPHS
0.04
0.04
0.16
0.16
0.17
0.20
0.00
0.01
Table 8: BLEU scores for all LLMs and prompt types.
GPT-3.5 Turbo
None
Low
Med
High
BASELINE
31
17
2
0
CORPUS-ONLY
18
23
8
1
GRAMMAR-ONLY
20
27
2
1
MORPHS-ONLY
3
22
16
9
CORPUS-GRAMMAR
18
23
9
0
CORPUS-MORPH
2
28
12
8
GRAMMAR-MORPH
3
29
13
5
CORPUS-GRAMMAR-MORPH
2
27
12
9
Table 9: Human quality annotation of GPT-3.5 outputs with automated retrieval (raw counts out of 50) by prompt
type.
1352

--- PAGE 22 ---
GPT-4o
None
Low
Med
High
BASELINE
0
10
20
20
CORPUS-ONLY
1
16
13
20
GRAMMAR-ONLY
0
17
16
17
MORPHS-ONLY
0
13
18
19
CORPUS-GRAMMAR
0
14
17
19
CORPUS-MORPH
0
10
17
23
GRAMMAR-MORPH
0
19
14
17
CORPUS-GRAMMAR-MORPH
0
9
20
21
Table 10: Human quality annotation of GPT-4o outputs with automated retrieval (raw counts out of 50) by prompt
type.
G
Full Error Counts
This section contains the full counts of annotated errors by category and prompt type.
GPT-3.5 Turbo
BASE
C
G
M
C+G
C+M
G+M
C+G+M
TOTAL
None
0
1
1
6
0
8
3
5
24
Addition
0
5
3
14
1
9
10
11
53
Omission
3
9
2
13
2
5
9
9
52
Substitution - Subject
0
3
0
7
0
9
9
12
40
Substitution - TAM
0
11
3
17
6
19
19
19
94
Substitution - Other
4
9
4
13
6
16
14
13
79
Overtranslation
1
1
1
4
0
2
3
2
14
Undertranslation
0
0
0
2
1
2
2
2
9
Target Error - Grammar
0
1
1
4
2
3
3
1
15
Target Error - Coher-
ence
0
0
3
5
2
3
7
7
27
Target Error - Style/Reg-
ister
0
3
0
5
2
3
1
2
16
Complete
Mistransla-
tion
30
19
21
2
18
2
2
2
96
Mistranslation - Lexical
Correspondence
15
13
23
9
21
11
15
10
117
Refusal
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
Total
54
75
62
101
61
92
97
95
637
Table 11: Human error type annotation of GPT-3.5 outputs with automated retrieval (raw counts, up to 3 errors per
sentence) by prompt type.
1353

--- PAGE 23 ---
GPT-4o
BASE
C
G
M
C+G
C+M
G+M
C+G+M
TOTAL
None
15
16
10
16
13
19
14
18
121
Addition
2
5
7
5
4
1
6
4
34
Omission
8
7
6
7
6
3
5
5
47
Substitution - Subject
1
2
0
1
2
1
2
2
11
Substitution - Other
22
24
22
18
19
18
17
20
160
Substitution - TAM
16
17
19
12
13
10
11
9
107
Overtranslation
2
1
0
2
2
2
1
2
12
Undertranslation
6
1
3
1
3
0
1
2
17
Target Error - Grammar
1
3
4
4
1
2
6
1
22
Target Error - Coher-
ence
1
3
4
5
4
5
9
5
36
Target Error - Style/Reg-
ister
1
2
3
4
4
2
4
3
23
Complete
Mistransla-
tion
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
Mistranslation - Lexical
Correspondence
4
3
5
6
6
6
9
4
43
Total
79
85
83
81
77
69
85
75
634
Table 12: Human error type annotation of GPT-4o outputs with automated retrieval (raw counts, up to 3 errors per
sentence) by prompt type.
1354

